docs(site): add i18n concept, guides, and API reference (#1600)
videojs/v10: site/src/content/docs/concepts/i18n.mdx

  </Demo>
</StyleCase>

Set `lang` on `<media-i18n>` when one player needs a different language from the rest of the page.

</FrameworkCase>

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["react"]}>

Mount `I18nProvider` inside the player `Provider`. Choose any shipped language to lazy-load its translations and update the player's control labels.

<StyleCase styles={["css"]}>
  <Demo
    files={[
      { title: "App.tsx", code: languageReactTsx, lang: "tsx" },
      { title: "App.css", code: languageReactCss, lang: "css" },
    ]}
  >
    <LanguageDemoReact client:idle />
  </Demo>
</StyleCase>

Pass `locale="es"` to `I18nProvider` when one player needs a different language from the rest of the page.

</FrameworkCase>

Changing the active language updates mounted controls without remounting the player. See <DocsLink slug="how-to/i18n-switch-locale">Switch locale dynamically</DocsLink> for complete examples.

## How translated text works

Each built-in piece of text has two parts:

- A stable key that identifies its meaning, such as `buttons.play`
- English fallback text, such as `Play`

Translation packs replace the fallback for a language:

```ts
{
  buttons: {
    play: 'Reproducir',
  },
}
```

> The key stays the same if the English wording changes. If the active language does not contain a key, the component keeps its readable English fallback.

Reviewer: I'm just gonna toss some stuff out that you can take or leave, in places where my 4:52pm brain had trouble understanding things:

```suggestion
You can count on this key staying the same, even if we change the english wording. For example, if we changed "Play" to "Banana" in the UI, the key will still be `buttons.play`. 

You also don't have to include every key to provide a translation. Any missing keys will display their readable English fallback
```

> Some translations include values supplied by the component. For example, `seek.forward` uses the English fallback `Seek forward {seconds} seconds`. Translations keep `{seconds}` where the number should appear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some translations include values supplied by the component. For example, `seek.forward` uses the English fallback `Seek forward {seconds} seconds`. When you write a translation, make sure to include `{seconds}` where the number should appear.
```

See <DocsLink slug="reference/translation-phrases">Translation keys</DocsLink> for the complete list of keys, English defaults, and the controls that use them.

## Where translations come from

Video.js looks for translated text in these places:

1. Overrides supplied to the current player
2. Registered custom translations
3. A built-in locale pack

> 4. The component's English fallback

Reviewer: I would love a short example for each of these.

Built-in packs load when the provider first encounters their language. You do not need to import Spanish, French, or another shipped language for normal client-rendered players.

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["react"]}>

The `translations` prop on `I18nProvider` overrides text for that provider subtree:

```tsx
<I18nProvider locale="es" translations={{ buttons: { play: 'Comenzar' } }}>
  <VideoSkin>...</VideoSkin>
</I18nProvider>
```

</FrameworkCase>

Use <DocsLink slug="reference/register-i18n">`registerI18n`</DocsLink> when you have a custom locale or want an override to apply across players:

```ts
registerI18n('es', {
  buttons: {
    play: 'Comenzar',
  },
});
```

> If registered and built-in translations still leave text missing, Chrome can use its [Browser Translation API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Translator) when the required on-device model is already installed. Treat browser translation as a fallback. Use reviewed locale packs for production-critical text.

Reviewer: > Chrome can use its Browser Translation API

Does this happen automatically for missing keys, or is there something I need to do?

## Locale fallback

Language tags follow the [BCP 47](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5646) parent chain. A player using Mexican Spanish checks `es-MX`, then `es`, before falling back to English:

```txt
es-MX → es → en
```

This lets a regional pack override only the text that differs from its parent language.

## Avoid a flash of English

Built-in packs normally load after the provider mounts. A player can briefly show English during server rendering or the first switch to a language.

Preload or register translations before rendering when the first translated paint matters:

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["react"]}>

- <DocsLink slug="how-to/i18n-ssr">Render translated text during SSR</DocsLink>
- <DocsLink slug="how-to/i18n-switch-locale">Preload languages before switching</DocsLink>

</FrameworkCase>

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["html"]}>

- <DocsLink slug="how-to/i18n-register-locale">Register a locale before rendering</DocsLink>

> - <DocsLink slug="how-to/i18n-switch-locale">Preload languages before switching</DocsLink>

Reviewer: We have a cool DocsLinkCard component that would look great here

---
title: Internationalization
description: How Video.js translates player UI copy with English phrase keys, a global registry, and locale providers
---

import FrameworkCase from '@/components/docs/FrameworkCase.astro';
import Aside from '@/components/Aside.astro';
import DocsLink from '@/components/docs/DocsLink.astro';

> Video.js ships in English by default. Non-English UI is opt-in: mount an i18n provider, then configure its active language. Video.js resolves the matching strings for control labels, ARIA text, tooltips, and error copy.

Reviewer: suggestion(non-blocking): I'd consider taking a jargon pass at this guide. For example, this first sentence introduces a _lot_ of technical language. What's an i18n provider? "resolves the matching strings"? I'd start simple -- "am I looking at the right guide?" -- and then slowly introduce technical concepts. 

Marking this as non-blocking since we can always clean up docs after they ship

Author: Reworded it - hopefully a little better now.

> The default i18n path is automatic after you opt in. Built-in locale packs lazy-load on demand, and Chrome can fill missing languages or missing keys through the [Browser Translation API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Translator) when an on-device translation model is already available.

Reviewer: suggestion(non-blocking): I'm having a bit of trouble grokking these sentences. "The default i18n path is automatic after you opt in". What's an i18n path? Opt into what? And then we start talking about lazy-loading locale packs and the browser translation api? I think they're too conceptually dense. I'd give these some room to breathe. Similar to my previous comment. Start small, introduce jargon gradually.

Marking this as non-blocking since we can always clean up docs after they ship

Author: Reworded.

Components ask for strings by current English phrase (`Play`, `Pause`, `Seek forward {seconds} seconds`), so missing translations stay readable.

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["html"]}>

```html
<html lang="es">
  <media-i18n>
    <video-player>
      <video-skin>
        <video src="..." playsinline></video>
      </video-skin>
    </video-player>
  </media-i18n>
</html>
```

</FrameworkCase>

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["react"]}>

```tsx
import { I18nProvider } from '@videojs/react/i18n';
import { Provider, VideoSkin, Video } from '@videojs/react/video';

// Set `<html lang="es">` on the document (layout, _document, or index.html)
export function App() {
  return (
    <Provider>
      <I18nProvider>
        <VideoSkin>
          <Video src="..." playsInline />
        </VideoSkin>
      </I18nProvider>
    </Provider>
  );
}
```

</FrameworkCase>

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["html"]}>

> Mount `<media-i18n>` and set its `lang` attribute, or let it inherit the nearest ancestor `lang`. Built-in packs then load automatically.

Reviewer: nit(non-blocking): to my taste, I prefer the explanations of the codeblocks before, not after. Gosh is this a minor nit, though

Author: Same. Done.

</FrameworkCase>

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["react"]}>

Mount `I18nProvider` and pass its `locale` prop to force a language, or omit it to inherit `lang`. Built-in packs then load automatically.

</FrameworkCase>

Registering packs yourself is only needed when you want custom copy, synchronous first paint, SSR, or CDN loading.

## Phrase keys

Core controls expose current English phrases. `PlayButtonCore.getLabel()` returns `'Play'`; the translator turns that into `'Play'`, `'Reproducir'`, or your override.

Phrase params are typed in <DocsLink slug="reference/translation-params">`TranslationParams`</DocsLink>. TypeScript catches missing `{param}` placeholders and wrong argument names at compile time.

Parametric strings use `{placeholder}` tokens, for example `'Seek forward {seconds} seconds'` and `'{duration} remaining'`.

> See <DocsLink slug="reference/translation-phrases">Translation phrases</DocsLink> for every current key and the player UI that uses it.

Reviewer: suggestion(non-blocking): There's a lot in these sentences. I think there's room for an example or two just to understand what's going on here.

Author: Added an example player in there.

## Global registry

`registerI18n(locale, translations)` merges strings into a process-wide map. English (`en`) is pre-registered when the i18n bundle loads, which is why the default player works without setup.

| API | Purpose |
| --- | --- |
| <DocsLink slug="reference/register-i18n">`registerI18n`</DocsLink> | Add or merge a locale layer |
| <DocsLink slug="reference/get-i18n-translations">`getI18nTranslations`</DocsLink> | Read the merged map for a locale |
| <DocsLink slug="reference/has-registered-locale">`hasRegisteredLocale`</DocsLink> | Check whether a tag is in the registry |
| <DocsLink slug="reference/on-i18n-registry-change">`onI18nRegistryChange`</DocsLink> | Subscribe to registry updates |

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["html"]}>

Import from `@videojs/html/i18n`.

</FrameworkCase>

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["react"]}>

Import from `@videojs/react/i18n`.

</FrameworkCase>

## Opt into a language

> Leave your app in English by default. To opt into another language, mount the framework provider around the translated player subtree:

Reviewer: question: what are you trying to communicate by saying "leave your app in English by default"?

Author: Reworded!

<FrameworkCase frameworks={["html"]}>

CDN consumers load self-registering modules:

```html
<script type="module" src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@videojs/html/cdn/video.js"></script>
<script type="module" src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@videojs/html/cdn/locales/es.js"></script>
```

</FrameworkCase>

## Browser translation

After lazy loading runs, Video.js can ask the browser to translate the English registry through the [Browser Translation API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Translator). This currently works in Chrome when `globalThis.Translator` is available and the matching on-device model is already installed.

Video.js does not download translation models during normal provider resolution. If Chrome reports the model as unavailable, downloadable, or still downloading, controls keep using the registered, lazy-loaded, or English fallback strings.

Browser translation is a fallback, not a replacement for reviewed locale packs. Use shipped packs or your own registered strings for production-critical copy and SSR.

## Common pitfalls

```ts

> // ❌ Don't: old camelCase keys are ignored

Reviewer: question: what are "old camelCase keys"? Why is the user likely to make this mistake?

Author: Ditched this

registerI18n('es', { play: 'Reproducir' });

// ✅ Do
registerI18n('es', { Play: 'Reproducir' });
```

```ts
// ❌ Don't: parametric key without the placeholder

> registerI18n('es', { 'Seek forward {seconds} seconds': 'Adelante 10 segundos' }); // TS error: missing {seconds}

Reviewer: it's freaking amazing that you got typescript to do this
